[Security Solution] Rework test plan for importing prebuilt rules (#213434)
elastic/kibana: x-pack/solutions/security/plugins/security_solution/docs/testing/test_plans/detection_response/prebuilt_rules/prebuilt_rule_import.md

## Scenarios

> ### Importing single prebuilt non-customized rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Importing a non-customized prebuilt rule
```

Author: I would like to keep the word "single" in these sections, because there's a section where we say "multiple ... in bulk". I will shuffle the rest of the words according to the suggestion.

Author: Renamed to `Importing a single non-customized prebuilt rule`.

#### **Scenario: Importing a non-customized rule when it's not installed**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a prebuilt rule
And this rule has a base version in the installed package
And this rule is equal to its base version
And this rule is not installed
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be created
And the created rule should be prebuilt
And the created rule should be marked as non-customized

> And the created rule's parameters should match the import payload

Author: @maximpn Yes, but:

- This is not related to this particular scenario.
- I will add separate scenarios for importing a rule which version matches some older, historical version from the package.
- Regarding checking that such rule should be available for upgrade right after the import, we could do that, but I'm not sure if we should do this in the importing scenarios, or we should do it separately in the upgrade test plan.

Anyway, great catch, I'll add something and share for review.

> And the created rule's parameters should match the import payload

Author: I added a new section `Handling historical base versions` with a few scenarios. I also included assertions about being available for upgrade.

There were a lot of cases to cover, because we have many moving parts there:
- what's the version of the rule in the import payload
- what's the version of the installed rule (if it's installed)
- what's the latest version
- if the installed rule is customized or not
- if the imported rule is customized or not (equal to its base version or not)

I haven't even covered if the installed rule itself has an asset in the package matching to its version. Not sure if this is important, perhaps it is.

So, I'm not sure that I was able to properly represent all this complexity in the scenarios I added. Please review and suggest your ideas.

```

#### **Scenario: Importing a non-customized rule on top of an installed non-customized rule**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a prebuilt rule
And this rule has a base version in the installed package
And this rule is equal to its base version
And this rule is already installed and is not customized
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be updated
And the updated rule should be prebuilt
And the updated rule should be marked as non-customized
And the updated rule's parameters should match the import payload
```

#### **Scenario: Importing a non-customized rule on top of an installed customized rule**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a prebuilt rule
And this rule has a base version in the installed package
And this rule is equal to its base version
And this rule is already installed and is customized
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be updated
And the updated rule should be prebuilt
And the updated rule should be marked as non-customized
And the updated rule's parameters should match the import payload
```

> ### Importing single prebuilt customized rules

Author: Renamed to `Importing a single customized prebuilt rule`.

```

#### **Scenario: Importing a customized rule on top of an installed non-customized rule**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a prebuilt rule
And this rule has a base version in the installed package
And this rule is different from its base version
And this rule is already installed and is not customized
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be updated
And the updated rule should be prebuilt
And the updated rule should be marked as customized
And the updated rule's parameters should match the import payload
```

#### **Scenario: Importing a customized rule on top of an installed customized rule**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a prebuilt rule
And this rule has a base version in the installed package
And this rule is different from its base version
And this rule is already installed and is customized
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be updated
And the updated rule should be prebuilt
And the updated rule should be marked as customized
And the updated rule's parameters should match the import payload
```

> ### Importing single custom rules

Reviewer 2: Do we want to have these cases in the `prebuilt_rule_import` test plan? I guess we're explicitly testing against the package and for the `rule_source` field but these don't pertain to prebuilt rules otherwise

Author: @dplumlee Great question. When I just started rewriting this test plan, my first reaction was to remove scenarios for custom rules. But then I realized that we should also explicitly test that with the new logic, custom rules are still being imported as custom rules in terms of their `immutable` and `rule_source` field values. That's what these scenarios intend to cover.

In this:

```Gherkin
Then the rule should be created
And the created rule should be custom
And the created rule's parameters should match the import payload
```

the `created rule should be custom` means that it has `immutable == false` and `rule_source == { type: 'internal' }`, which should be covered by dedicated tests.

#### **Scenario: Importing a new custom rule**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a custom rule
And its rule_id does NOT match any rule assets from the installed package
And this rule is not created yet
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be created
And the created rule should be custom
And the created rule's parameters should match the import payload
```

#### **Scenario: Importing a custom rule on top of an existing custom rule**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a custom rule
And its rule_id does NOT match any rule assets from the installed package
And this rule is already created
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be updated
And the updated rule should be custom
And the updated rule's parameters should match the import payload
```

### Importing multiple rules in bulk

#### **Scenario: Importing a mixture of new prebuilt and custom rules**

This scenario is a "smoke test" for all the user stories from the [Product requirements](#product-requirements) section.

**Automation**: 1 API integration test, 1 e2e test.

```Gherkin

> Given the import payload contains prebuilt non-customized, prebuilt customized, and custom rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the import payload contains non-customized prebuilt, customized prebuilt, and custom rules
```

Author: Addressed.

And the created rules' parameters should match the import payload
```

#### **Scenario: Importing a mixture of prebuilt and custom rules on top of existing rules**

This scenario is a "smoke test" for all the user stories from the [Product requirements](#product-requirements) section.

**Automation**: 1 API integration test, 1 e2e test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains prebuilt non-customized, prebuilt customized, and custom rules
And the prebuilt rules have a base version in the installed package
And the custom rules' rule_id does NOT match any rule assets from the installed package
And the rules are already installed or created
When the user imports these rules
Then the rules should be updated
And the updated rules should be correctly identified as prebuilt or custom
And the updated rules' is_customized field should be correctly calculated
And the updated rules' parameters should match the import payload
```

### Importing prebuilt rules when the package is not installed

#### **Scenario: Importing new prebuilt rules when the package is not installed**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin

> Given the import payload contains two prebuilt rules (non-customized + customized)

Reviewer: `two prebuilt rules (non-customized + customized)` - are rules combined to squash two scenarios in one?

Author: @maximpn Yes, since all the steps in these two scenarios are the same (except the import payload), we can squash them into a single one, and automate this in a single test. It is also logically cohesive: the two scenarios are about the same thing which is `Importing new prebuilt rules when the package is not installed`.

And a new prebuilt rule asset is added in it with the same rule_id and a higher version
Then the rule should be upgradeable to the asset's version as if it were a prebuilt rule
When the user upgrades this rule to the TARGET version
Then the rule should be upgraded to the asset's version
And the upgraded rule should be prebuilt
And the upgraded rule should be marked as non-customized
And the upgraded rule's parameters should match the asset
```

### Handling missing base versions

NOTE: These are not edge cases but rather normal cases. In many package upgrade scenarios, hundreds of prebuilt rules (out of ~1300 of them at the time of writing) won't have a base version.

**When the base version** of a prebuilt rule that is being imported **is missing** among the `security-rule` asset saved objects, and the user imports this rule, the following scenarios apply.

#### **Scenario: Importing a prebuilt rule with a missing base version when it's not installed**

If this rule is not installed, it should be created with `is_customized` field set to `false`.

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a prebuilt rule

> And its rule_id matches one or a few rule assets from the installed package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And its rule_id matches one or more prebuilt rule assets from the installed package
```

Author: @maximpn In these test plans we just say "rule asset" without adding "prebuilt" - it is assumed. Since there are no custom rule assets, we can afford being more succinct. The term "rule asset" is explained in the common terminology.

Author: `one or more` 👍

And this rule is already installed and marked as non-customized
And the installed rule is NOT equal to the import payload
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be updated
And the updated rule should be prebuilt
And the updated rule should be marked as customized
And the updated rule's version should match the import payload
And the updated rule's parameters should match the import payload
```

#### **Scenario: Importing a prebuilt rule with a missing base version when it's already installed, is not customized, and is equal to the import payload**

If this rule is already installed, it should be updated. Its `is_customized` field should stay unchanged (`false` or `true`) if the rule from the import payload is equal to the installed rule.

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a customized prebuilt rule
And its rule_id matches one or a few rule assets from the installed package
And its version does NOT match any of those rule assets
And this rule is already installed and marked as non-customized
And the installed rule is equal to the import payload
When the user imports the rule

> Then the rule should be updated

Reviewer 3: Since there's no change, should we say that updating this rule should be skipped?

Author: @nikitaindik It's a good question. It depends on whether we want the `updated_by` field and the API Key of the rule to be updated according to the user who run the import. There can be arguments for either of the options: yes and no.

Reviewer 3: If we do update these fields in `Importing a non-customized rule on top of an installed non-customized rule`, then we should probably update them here as well to be consistent.

Do you think it'd be a good idea to mention specific fields? For example: `Then the rule's updated_at and updated_by fields should be updated`.

Author: > Do you think it'd be a good idea to mention specific fields? For example: Then the rule's `updated_at` and `updated_by` fields should be updated.

@nikitaindik No, I would not clarify this in the text of scenarios. This feels like an "implementation detail", just like instead of saying anything about the `immutable` and `rule_source` fields we say this:

```Gherkin
And the updated rule should be prebuilt
And the updated rule should be marked as customized
```

I will add a remark to the Terminology section that will explain what `rule should be updated` could mean exactly in automated tests.

Author: Addressed.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a prebuilt rule without a version field
And its rule_id matches one or a few rule assets from the installed package
When the user imports the rule
Then the import should be rejected with a message "version field is required"
```

#### **Scenario: Importing a new custom rule missing a `version` field**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a custom rule without a version field
And its rule_id does NOT match any rule assets from the installed package
And this rule is not created yet
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be created
And the created rule should be custom
And the created rule's "version" field should be set to 1
```

#### **Scenario: Importing an existing custom rule missing a `version` field**

**Automation**: 1 API integration test.

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a custom rule without a version field
And its rule_id does NOT match any rule assets from the installed package
And this rule is already created and has "version > 1"
When the user imports the rule
Then the rule should be updated
And the updated rule should be custom

> And the updated rule's "version" field should stay unchanged

Reviewer 3: If the overwrite flag is on, don't we expect the installed rule to be completely replaced by the imported one, including "version"?

Author: @nikitaindik The imported rule doesn't have a `version`:

```Gherkin
Given the import payload contains a custom rule without a version field
```

This test says that instead of updating the installed rule's version to 1 (which would be the default value for the missing version in the import payload), we deliberately preserve the version of the installed rule.

```

### Licensing

> TODO: describe licensing restrictions that apply to rule import.

Reviewer 3: Since licensing-related import restrictions are now remove, I believe we can also remove this section.

Author: @nikitaindik I think we should have some licensing scenarios. These scenarios should cover exactly that: we don't have any licensing restrictions and custom, prebuilt non-customized, and even prebuilt customized rules can be imported under any license and any serverless tier. And these scenarios would need to be automated. These should be "smoke" scenarios where we don't test every single edge case, only the basic functionality of importing various kinds of rules.
